Hanuman Chalisa means: the forty-verse hymn in praise of Lord Hanuman. The Hanuman Chalisa originated in the 16th century with the revered poet-saint Goswami Tulsidas, a key figure in the Bhakti movement, who composed it in the Awadhi language (a dialect of Hindi) as a profound tribute to Lord Hanuman, praising his strength, devotion, and virtues. The Hanuman Chalisa is one of Hinduism's most beloved devotional hymns, believed to bring protection, strength, and blessings to those who chant it with faith. Tulsidas also founded the Sankat Mochan Hanuman Temple in Varanasi, said to be where he first saw Hanuman, further cementing the hymn's connection to the deity.

Lord Hanuman is a revered deity in Hindu tradition, known for his unwavering devotion to Lord Rama. He is celebrated for his immense strength, courage, and wisdom, and is considered a symbol of selfless service and devotion. Lord Hanuman is also known as the son of the wind god, Vayu, and is a central figure in the epic Ramayana.

The Hanuman Chalisa is a devotional hymn composed of forty verses that extol the virtues and exploits of Lord Hanuman. The hymn begins with a salutation to the Lord Guru, seeking purification of the mind and the ability to praise Lord Rama's glory. The devotee acknowledges their own lack of wisdom and prays to Lord Hanuman for strength, intelligence, and knowledge, and for the removal of sorrows and afflictions. Lord Hanuman is hailed as the ocean of knowledge and virtues, and the lord of the monkeys, who illuminates the three worlds. The verses express the devotee's desire for Lord Hanuman to reside in their heart, alongside Lord Rama, Lakshmana, and Sita, bringing peace and prosperity. The hymn concludes with a plea for Lord Hanuman to remove all obstacles and bestow blessings upon the devotee. The Lord Hanuman Chalisa is recited for protection, strength, and the fulfillment of desires, and it is believed to bring peace and harmony to the devotee's life.

Section 1
Sanskrit
श्रीगुरु चरन सरोज रज निज मनु मुकुरु सुधारि ।
बरनउँ रघुबर बिमल जसु जो दायकु फल चारि ॥
Transliteration
śrīguru carana saroja raja nija manu mukuru sudhāri .
baranaüm̐ raghubara bimala jasu jo dāyaku phala cāri ..
Translation
Having polished the mirror of my heart with the dust of my Guru's lotus feet, I recite the divine fame of the greatest king of Raghukul dynasty, which bestows us with the fruit of all the four efforts.
बुद्धिहीन तनु जानिके सुमिरौं पवन-कुमार ।
बल बुधि बिद्या देहु मोहिं हरहु कलेस बिकार ॥
buddhihīna tanu jānike sumirauṃ pavana-kumāra .
bala budhi bidyā dehu mohiṃ harahu kalesa bikāra ..
Knowing that this mind of mine has less intelligence, I remember the 'Son of Wind' who, granting me strength, wisdom and all kinds of knowledge, removes all my suffering and shortcomings.
Section 2
॥चौपाई॥
जय हनुमान ज्ञान गुन सागर ।
जय कपीस तिहुँ लोक उजागर ॥१॥

jaya hanumāna jñāna guna sāgara .
jaya kapīsa tihum̐ loka ujāgara ..1..
Victory to Lord Hanuman, the ocean of wisdom and virtue. Victory to the Lord who is supreme among the monkeys, illuminator of the three worlds.
राम दूत अतुलित बल धामा ।
अञ्जनि-पुत्र पवनसुत नामा ॥२॥
rāma dūta atulita bala dhāmā .
añjani-putra pavanasuta nāmā ..2..
you are Lord Rama's emissary,‌ the abode of matchless power, Mother Anjani's son and also popular as the ‘Son of the Wind’.
महाबीर बिक्रम बजरङ्गी ।
कुमति निवार सुमति के सङ्गी ॥३॥
mahābīra bikrama bajaraṅgī .
kumati nivāra sumati ke saṅgī ..3..
Great hero, you are as mighty as a thunderbolt. you remove evil intellect and are the companion of those having good ones.
कञ्चन बरन बिराज सुबेसा ।
कानन कुण्डल कुञ्चित केसा ॥४॥
kañcana barana birāja subesā .
kānana kuṇḍala kuñcita kesā ..4..
your skin is golden in color and you are adorned with beautiful clothes. you have adorning earrings in your ears and your hair is curly and thick.
हाथ बज्र औ ध्वजा बिराजै ।
काँधे मूँज जनेउ साजै ॥५॥
hātha bajra au dhvajā birājai .
kām̐dhe mūm̐ja janeu sājai ..5..
In your hands, shine a mace and a flag of righteousness. A sacred thread adorns your right shoulder.
सङ्कर सुवन केसरीनन्दन ।
तेज प्रताप महा जग बन्दन ॥६॥
saṅkara suvana kesarīnandana .
teja pratāpa mahā jaga bandana ..6..
You are the embodiment of Lord Shiva and vanar-raj Kesari's son. There is no limit or end to your glory, your magnificence. The whole universe worships you.
बिद्यावान गुनी अति चातुर ।
राम काज करिबे को आतुर ॥७॥
bidyāvāna gunī ati cātura .
rāma kāja karibe ko ātura ..7..
You are the wisest of the wise, virtuous and (morally) clever. You are always eager to do Lord Rama's works.
प्रभु चरित्र सुनिबे को रसिया ।
राम लखन सीता मन बसिया ॥८॥
prabhu caritra sunibe ko rasiyā .
rāma lakhana sītā mana basiyā ..8..
You feel extremely delighted in listening to Lord Rama's doings and conduct. Lord Rama, Mother Sita, and Lord Laxmana dwell forever in your heart.
सूक्ष्म रूप धरि सियहिं दिखावा ।
बिकट रूप धरि लङ्क जरावा ॥९॥
sūkṣma rūpa dhari siyahiṃ dikhāvā .
bikaṭa rūpa dhari laṅka jarāvā ..9..
Taking the subtle form, you appeared in front of Mother Sita. And, taking the formidable form, you burnt the Lanka (Ravana's kingdom).
भीम रूप धरि असुर सँहारे ।
रामचन्द्र के काज सँवारे ॥१०॥
bhīma rūpa dhari asura sam̐hāre .
rāmacandra ke kāja sam̐vāre ..10..
Taking the massive form (like that of Bheema), you slaughtered the demons. This is how, you completed Lord Rama's tasks, successfully.
लाय सञ्जीवन लखन जियाये ।
श्रीरघुबीर हरषि उर लाये ॥११॥
lāya sañjīvana lakhana jiyāye .
śrīraghubīra haraṣi ura lāye ..11..
Bringing the magic-herb (sanjivani), you revived Lord Laxmana.
रघुपति कीह्नी बहुत बड़ाई ।
तुम मम प्रिय भरतहि सम भाई ॥१२॥
raghupati kīhnī bahuta bar̤āī .
tuma mama priya bharatahi sama bhāī ..12..
Raghupati, Lord Rama praised you greatly and overflowing in gratitude, said that you are a dear brother to him just as Bharat is.
सहस बदन तुह्मारो जस गावैं ।
अस कहि श्रीपति कण्ठ लगावैं ॥१३॥
sahasa badana tuhmāro jasa gāvaiṃ .
asa kahi śrīpati kaṇṭha lagāvaiṃ ..13..
Saying this, Lord Rama drew you to himself and embraced you. Sages like Sanaka, Gods like Brahma and sages like Narada and even the thousand-mouthed serpent sing your fame!
सनकादिक ब्रह्मादि मुनीसा ।
नारद सारद सहित अहीसा ॥१४॥
sanakādika brahmādi munīsā .
nārada sārada sahita ahīsā ..14..
Sanak, Sanandan and the other Rishis and great saints; Brahma - the god, Narada, Saraswati - the Mother Divine and the King of serpents sing your glory.
जम कुबेर दिगपाल जहाँ ते ।
कबि कोबिद कहि सके कहाँ ते ॥१५॥
jama kubera digapāla jahām̐ te .
kabi kobida kahi sake kahām̐ te ..15..
Yama, Kubera and the guardians of the four quarters; poets and scholars - none can express your glory.
तुम उपकार सुग्रीवहिं कीह्ना ।
राम मिलाय राज पद दीह्ना ॥१६॥
tuma upakāra sugrīvahiṃ kīhnā .
rāma milāya rāja pada dīhnā ..16..
You helped Sugriva by introducing him to Lord Rama and regaining his crown. Therefore, you gave him the Kingship (the dignity of being called a king).
तुह्मरो मन्त्र बिभीषन माना ।
लङ्केस्वर भए सब जग जाना ॥१७॥
tuhmaro mantra bibhīṣana mānā .
laṅkesvara bhae saba jaga jānā ..17..
Likewise, complying with your preachings, even Vibhishana became the King of Lanka.
जुग सहस्र जोजन पर भानु ।
लील्यो ताहि मधुर फल जानू ॥१८॥
juga sahasra jojana para bhānu .
līlyo tāhi madhura phala jānū ..18..
You swallowed the sun, located thousands of miles away, mistaking it to be a sweet, red fruit!
प्रभु मुद्रिका मेलि मुख माहीं ।
जलधि लाँघि गये अचरज नाहीं ॥१९॥
prabhu mudrikā meli mukha māhīṃ .
jaladhi lām̐ghi gaye acaraja nāhīṃ ..19..
Keeping the ring in your mouth, which was given to you by Lord Rama, you crossed over the ocean, to no astonishment, whatsoever.
दुर्गम काज जगत के जेते ।
सुगम अनुग्रह तुह्मरे तेते ॥२०॥
durgama kāja jagata ke jete .
sugama anugraha tuhmare tete ..20..
All difficult tasks of this world become easy, with your grace.
राम दुआरे तुम रखवारे ।
होत न आज्ञा बिनु पैसारे ॥२१॥
rāma duāre tuma rakhavāre .
hota na ājñā binu paisāre ..21..
You are the guardian at Lord Rama's door. Nobody can move forward without your permission which means that Lord Rama's darshans (to get the sight of) are possible only with your blessings.
सब सुख लहै तुह्मारी सरना ।
तुम रच्छक काहू को डर ना ॥२२॥
saba sukha lahai tuhmārī saranā .
tuma racchaka kāhū ko ḍara nā ..22..
Those who take refuge in you, find all the comforts and happiness. When we have a protector like you, we do not need to get scared of anybody or anything.
आपन तेज सह्मारो आपै ।
तीनों लोक हाँक तें काँपै ॥२३॥
āpana teja sahmāro āpai .
tīnoṃ loka hām̐ka teṃ kām̐pai ..23..
You alone can withstand your magnificence. All the three worlds start trembling at one roar of yours.
भूत पिसाच निकट नहिं आवै ।
महाबीर जब नाम सुनावै ॥२४॥
bhūta pisāca nikaṭa nahiṃ āvai .
mahābīra jaba nāma sunāvai ..24..
O Mahaveer! No ghosts or evil spirits come near the ones who remember your name. Therefore, just remembering your name does everything!
नासै रोग हरै सब पीरा ।
जपत निरन्तर हनुमत बीरा ॥२५॥
nāsai roga harai saba pīrā .
japata nirantara hanumata bīrā ..25..
O Hanuman! All diseases and all kinds of pain get eradicated when one recites or chants your name. Therefore, chanting your name regularly is considered to be very significant.
सङ्कट तें हनुमान छुड़ावै ।
मन क्रम बचन ध्यान जो लावै ॥२६॥
saṅkaṭa teṃ hanumāna chur̤āvai .
mana krama bacana dhyāna jo lāvai ..26..
Whoever meditates upon or worships you with thought, word, and deed, gets freedom from all kinds of crisis and affliction.
सब पर राम तपस्वी राजा ।
तिन के काज सकल तुम साजा ॥२७॥
saba para rāma tapasvī rājā .
tina ke kāja sakala tuma sājā ..27..
Lord Rama is the greatest ascetic amongst all the kings. But, it's only you who carried out all the tasks of Lord Sri Rama.
और मनोरथ जो कोई लावै ।
सोई अमित जीवन फल पावै ॥२८॥
aura manoratha jo koī lāvai .
soī amita jīvana phala pāvai ..28..
One who comes to you with any longing or a sincere desire obtains the abundance of the manifested fruit, which remains undying throughout life.
चारों जुग परताप तुह्मारा ।
है परसिद्ध जगत उजियारा ॥२९॥
cāroṃ juga paratāpa tuhmārā .
hai parasiddha jagata ujiyārā ..29..
Your splendor fills all the four ages. And, your glory is renowned throughout the world.
साधु सन्त के तुम रखवारे ।
असुर निकन्दन राम दुलारे ॥३०॥
sādhu santa ke tuma rakhavāre .
asura nikandana rāma dulāre ..30..
You are the guardian of saints and sages; the destroyer of demons and adored by Lord Rama.
अष्टसिद्धि नौ निधि के दाता ।
अस बर दीन जानकी माता ॥३१॥
aṣṭasiddhi nau nidhi ke dātā .
asa bara dīna jānakī mātā ..31..
You have been blessed by Mother Janaki to give boon further, to the deserving ones, wherein you can grant the siddhis (eight different powers) and the nidhis (nine different kinds of wealth).
राम रसायन तुह्मरे पासा ।
सदा रहो रघुपति के दासा ॥३२॥
rāma rasāyana tuhmare pāsā .
sadā raho raghupati ke dāsā ..32..
You have the essence of Ram bhakti, may you always remain the humble and devoted servant of Raghupati.
तुह्मरे भजन राम को पावै ।
जनम जनम के दुख बिसरावै ॥३३॥
tuhmare bhajana rāma ko pāvai .
janama janama ke dukha bisarāvai ..33..
When one sings your praise, your name,  he gets to meet Lord Rama and finds relief from the sorrows of many lifetimes.
अन्त काल रघुबर पुर जाई ।
जहाँ जन्म हरिभक्त कहाई ॥३४॥
anta kāla raghubara pura jāī .
jahām̐ janma haribhakta kahāī ..34..
By your grace, one will go to the immortal abode of Lord Rama after death and remain devoted to him.
और देवता चित्त न धरई ।
हनुमत सेइ सर्ब सुख करई ॥३५॥
aura devatā citta na dharaī .
hanumata sei sarba sukha karaī ..35..
It is not needed to serve any other deity or god. Service to Lord Hanuman gives all the comforts.
सङ्कट कटै मिटै सब पीरा ।
जो सुमिरै हनुमत बलबीरा ॥३६॥
saṅkaṭa kaṭai miṭai saba pīrā .
jo sumirai hanumata balabīrā ..36..
All troubles cease for the one who remembers the powerful lord, Lord Hanuman and all his pains also come to an end.
जय जय जय हनुमान गोसाईं ।
कृपा करहु गुरुदेव की नाईं ॥३७॥
jaya jaya jaya hanumāna gosāīṃ .
kṛpā karahu gurudeva kī nāīṃ ..37..
O Lord Hanuman! Praises and glory to you O mighty lord, please bestow your grace as our supreme guru.
जो सत बार पाठ कर कोई ।
छूटहि बन्दि महा सुख होई ॥३८॥
jo sata bāra pāṭha kara koī .
chūṭahi bandi mahā sukha hoī ..38..
One who recites this Chalisa a hundred times is released from all bondages and will attain great bliss.
जो यह पढ़ै हनुमान चालीसा ।
होय सिद्धि साखी गौरीसा ॥३९॥
jo yaha par̤hai hanumāna cālīsā .
hoya siddhi sākhī gaurīsā ..39..
One who reads and recites this Hanuman Chalisa, all his works get accomplished. Lord Shiva, himself, is the witness to it.
तुलसीदास सदा हरि चेरा ।
कीजै नाथ हृदय महँ डेरा ॥४०॥
tulasīdāsa sadā hari cerā .
kījai nātha hṛdaya maham̐ ḍerā ..40..
O Lord Hanuman, may I always remain a servant, a devotee to Lord Sri Ram, says Tulsidas. And, may you always reside in my heart.
॥दोहा॥
पवनतनय सङ्कट हरन मङ्गल मूरति रूप ।
राम लखन सीता सहित हृदय बसहु सुर भूप ॥
pavanatanaya saṅkaṭa harana maṅgala mūrati rūpa .
rāma lakhana sītā sahita hṛdaya basahu sura bhūpa ..
O the Son of Wind, you are the destroyer of all sorrows. you are the embodiment of fortune and prosperity.
With Lord Rama, Laxmana and Mother Sita, dwell in my heart, always.
